Quality Assurance==================Basic Competitions-------------------After studying this chapter, participants will be able to:-	Understand how to provide tags or spatial attributes appropriately and accurately -	Understanding error messages and warnings from validation tool in JOSM A. Presets Standardization ---------------------------OpenStreetMap allow the entire user to giving information as much as possible on their map. This can be noted on each mapped object using the available preset list menu on the editor of JOSM.  Sometimes we find an inconsistency in the provision of information on various objects. Thus is created the standardization of the presets list. This standardization presets was created with a purposes:1. Data consistency 2. Facilitate search and data processing3. As benchmarks in the provision of information via presets4. As a reference to when validation make improvements or data5. Maximize the use of existing in internal presets josm6. Maximize data visuals OpenStreetMap at the websiteWith the standardization of this preset, all users are expected to use this standard OSM when doing the editing. One of the advantages of using internal presets that are already available in JOSM is later visualization object will appear on the website of OpenStreetMap.List of standard preset with some naming convention can be found in the Appendix. The attachment contains all the most commonly used presets along with the explanation of how to tag images as well as examples of its object. B. Validation-------------Validation is one of many ways to improve OpenStreetMap data quality with check and solve errors and warnings in JOSM. Previously we have discussed ensures the quality in Intermediate (secondary) guidelines regarding the initial stage performs validation. In this chapter the material validation will be explained further and details about the types of warnings (warning) that always appear when doing validation and solutions that are used to correct these problems. Below is some kind of warning (warning) that often appear when a validation in JOSM, among other.### 1. Similarly Named Way   Problem : two or more way have same street name, such as Samudra Street in way 1, 2 and 3Solution : You can ignore this warning if the street name already corrected or if you don’t know the correct name. If the street name is not match on the field you can correct it.### 2. Way end node near other highways   This warnings appears if the end road to connect to other road Problem: Way end node not connected with other way or it can be passing through with other way.Solution:  You can using "Join Node to Way" or with shortcut "J". Here’s how to fix it, select first node and then moved up to the point of approaching the other way and then select feature "Join Node to Way"### 3. Unnamed Ways  Problem: way not given tagSolution: Select way and give highway presets### 4. Nodes at same position Problem : Node with same position and overlapped Solution : Delete the overlapped node ### 5. Ways with same position  Problem : Overlapped polygon in same object.Solution : 1. Delete the overlapped polygon 2. In this picture objects that have warnings is belong to outside area that we download it, so we must to ignore it if we want to avoid conflict when we upload. ### 6. Area style way is not close Problem : Polygon or building not closedSolution : 1. Connect first node with end node with Merge Nodes              2. Click last node and connect it to first node with Draw Nodes### 7. No tags-Unconnected nodes with physical tags  Problem: There’s unconnected node without tag.Solution: Delete node. 